---
title: Hauptthema
id: hauptthema
---

India’s journey as an independent democratic country began 75 years ago, opening the way of a wave of struggles, decolonization, and independence that would mark the history of Asia and Africa from the 1950s to the 1970s. Its remarkable regional, cultural, religious, and linguistic diversity anticipated dilemmas and challenges that many other postcolonial polities had to face. The coming of democracy in India was one of the most consequential political developments of the century; until today the country is considered the largest democracy of the world. Almost all features of Indian politics could have been characterized as detrimental to this development: There was no really a party system; democratic institutions should be built upon the legacy of colonial ones; the violence unleashed during partition conspired against stable institutional arrangements; the series of international armed conflicts with Pakistan and China promoted militarization; literacy rates were still very low; women, now subjects of political rights enshrined in the Indian constitution, did not fully participate in public life yet. Development, modernization, and even an idiosyncratic form of ‘socialism’ became promising perspectives, even imperatives, in this difficult setting. Independence was, all challenges and problems aside, also a time of hope and positive projections, a time in which possible futures may be formulated and implemented and realities were to be overcome. It is not unexpected that under these circumstances the question of education advanced to one of the most urgent and controversial ones.

The high hopes and aspirations for developing a new independent India went far beyond what the realities of the Indian educational system could deliver. The educational structures that India inherited from the British at the brick of independence did not answer the needs of the new nation building and state formation project. Problems and challenges such as unequal access to schools along lines of caste, gender, and religion, huge regional disparities, the unsolved question of vocational education, the shortcomings of teachers’ training, memoristic pedagogies, and the focus of universities on professional training conspired against the vision of an independent, modern, self-sufficient India. In the view of the new political elite, the education system was perceived more as a remnant of an obscure past than as the foundation that could lead India to modernity. Although far from mutually exclusive, the aspirations to democratize and, simultaneously, foster economic progress produced tensions in prioritising and implementing educational reforms. Nation-building under conditions of political democracy demanded both strategies, particularly in a context, in which references to ‘socialism’ abounded. Yet limited resources and divergent visions of what should come first had to be factored in the complex equation of educational policies in a federal polity.

By putting the limelight on the intersection between development, nation building and education in early post-colonial India, this conference aims to introduce new perspectives to the existing historiography of India. It will bridge a gap between the vast scholarship on education and colonialism at the one hand, and an emerging new scholarship on India’s post-colonial state formation processes on the other. The conference explores new perspectives that can deepen our understanding of how educational reforms coincided and underpinned the early start of India’s nation building project as a democratic polity.


