---
title: "Can Muslim universities be Indian universities? Muslim universities as agents of nation-building in post-independence India. "
author: Laurence Gautier
from: "Centre des Sciences Humaines, Delhi"
---

After independence, India’s state authorities regarded universities as key instruments to boost the country’s economic growth and to strengthen its ‘spiritual unity’. Universities were to provide, in Humayun Kabir’s words, an ‘intellectual articulation’ for India’s ‘synthesis of cultures’, particularly at a time when the memories of partition were still vivid in people’s minds. Within this framework, what role did minority institutions play in the construction of the nation? This presentation will focus on the state’s relations with two public Muslim universities — Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia Islamia—, in the early independence period. As state-sponsored universities, established by Muslims, primarily (though not exclusively) for Muslim students, these institutions found themselves at a critical juncture between central state authorities and India’s largest minority. I will argue that for state authorities, they served as privileged intermediaries to speak to the Muslim population, especially in the post-partition context where Nehru and his allies sought to secure Muslims’ sense of belonging to the nation. At the same time, state authorities feared that to put too much emphasis on their denominational character would revive communal divisions, hence their efforts to keep these institutions under state control. By looking at the state’s ambivalences vis-à-vis these universities, this presentation will probe the larger tensions of the government’s attitude towards Muslim citizens. It will also examine, in turn, how university members responded to the state’s policy and sought to participate to nation-building efforts on their own terms, as partners rather than followers. 