---
title: "Education and Democracy: A Marginalised Perspective on Inclusion"
author: Sphoorti 
from: Zakir Husain Centre for Educational Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi
---

Education played a significant role in the nation-building exercise of several young nation-states of the 20th century. In India, however, education carried the burden of the past of being a ‘contested’ terrain (Bhattacharya 1998) when it comes to the access and nature of education for several diverse social groups like Dalits, lower castes, and women, who faced historical exclusion from the formal educational institutions. When modern educational institutions opened their doors to these excluded groups there was a social unrest among many, as the pre-existing social order was threatened. One response to this was the establishment of several segregated educational spaces based exclusively on caste, religion, and gender. Jenkins (2014) highlights that such segregated institutions have a positive value when it concerns the education of historically oppressed groups, as they do not face the usual discrimination in these spaces. This is however contradictory to the several educational initiatives undertaken by Dr. B. R. Ambedkar who played a pivotal role in building democratic institutions that are foundational to independent India. This paper highlights several historical instances and responses to the education of Dalits in present South India by looking at them through the contemporary larger debates and complexities concerning diversity and inclusion in education. The competing liberal and poststructuralist theoretical perspectives are taken into account when dealing with these complex responses to the education of marginalised groups.