---
title: "Radio and Television for Development and Democracy: Adult Education in India in the 1950s and 1960s"
author: Taylor Sherman
from: Department of International History, London School of Economics
vita: |
  Prof. Sherman, an American-born scholar, studied International Relations and History at the London School of Economics and obtained her PhD at Cambridge University. She is a historian of culture and politics in modern South Asia, particularly interested in conceptions of citizenship, belonging and minorities in Indian politics. Her current research project focuses on environmental regeneration and its links to policy, expert regimes, and cultural imaginative implications. Her most recent book publication: Nehru’s India: A History in Seven Myths (Princeton University Press, 2022)
---

At independence, the question of education was not purely academic. Educating India’s masses was tied to the imagination of the young country as a democracy where citizens would responsibly exercise their right to vote. It was also an important element in fostering the changes in agricultural practices that were regarded as essential to feed a hungry nation. This paper surveys adult education more broadly, and then narrows in on two experiments on the use of radio and then television for adult education. With some aid from UNESCO, these new forms of media also promised a novel pedagogy for India's population. Programmes for the new India delivered what their social scientist designers understood to be 'new knowledge' through entertaining programmes. This was not passive education, however, as the programmes were followed by group discussions, designed to spur popular action on a subject. The topics varied from village sanitation, water conservation and new farming methods, to cultivating middle class manners among city dwellers by teaching them how to queue and where to spit. The paper charts the amazement of the social scientists – Indian and western – conducting this experiment, as their expectations about India’s passive, stagnant and homogenous population were upended. It concludes with a discussion of what these experiments reveal about India’s approach to international aid, and to Indian socialism.
