---
title: "Science, Religion, and the Institutionalization of Medical Education in Postcolonial India"
author: Renny Thomas
from: "Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhopal"
---

This paper looks at some key debates on the nature of medical education in postcolonial India. Particularly, it will look at Nehru’s engagement with the Indian knowledge systems, and the institutional and pedagogic status of non-western medical practices in the postcolonial period.  Jawaharlal Nehru was a spokesperson of modern science and technology and saw elements of emancipation in it. For him, scientific method through laboratory work was the only way to validate any systems of knowledge. The massive institutionalization of modern science and technology invited anger from few fellow politicians and leaders as these projects had totally ignored Indian systems of medicines such as Ayurveda and Unani. To become modern the existing knowledge systems were asked to prove their scientificity. Nehru responded to the advocates of Indian systems of knowledge by stating that the Government wouldn’t support non-scientific, religious, and superstitious beliefs and practices. In this presentation, I draw material from my archival research on Nehru’s engagement with the question of scientific method and the institutionalisation of medical education in India, and from my ongoing ethnographic research among the Homeopathic and Unani practitioners in Bhopal. It looks at the initial  phase of institutionalisation of medical education in India and the status of non-western medical practices in the postcolonial situation, pedagogically and institutionally. 